

Section 1: Overall Design


Q1. What is the responsibility of execute_command()?

->  execute_command() is responsible for executing a command after parsing is complete. 
    It detects whether the command is a single command or a pipeline, creates pipes when necessary, 
    launches child processes through run_single(), groups pipeline processes into the same process group, 
    manages foreground/background execution, waits for foreground jobs, and restores terminal ownership back to the shell.

Q2. Why did you separate run_single() from execute_command()?

->  execute_command() manages pipeline-level execution, while run_single() is responsible for executing one command. 
    This separation avoids duplicating logic for redirections, variable expansion, argument parsing, and process creation when executing pipelines.

Q3. Why don't you call execvp() directly from execute_command()?

->  execute_command() may need to execute multiple commands connected by pipes. The actual execution of an individual command including 
    redirections and argument preparation is delegated to run_single(), keeping each function focused on a single responsibility.



Section 2: Environment Variable Expansion


Q4. Why do you expand variables before splitting arguments?

    expand_vars(cmd, expanded, sizeof(expanded));

->  Environment variables should be expanded before argument parsing because their values may contain spaces or become part of an argument.
    This matches the normal shell execution order where expansion occurs before command execution.

Q5. How does $HOME become its actual value?

->  When the parser encounters $, it extracts the variable name, calls getenv() to retrieve its value from the process environment,
    and copies the value into the expanded command buffer.

Q6. What happens if the environment variable doesn't exist?

->  getenv() returns NULL. My implementation simply inserts nothing into the output, so the undefined variable expands to an empty string.



Section 3: Redirection



Q7. Why do you parse redirections before forking?             

->  The child process needs to know which files should replace stdin or stdout before executing the new program. 
    Parsing beforehand allows the child to configure file descriptors correctly before calling execvp().

Q8. Why do you call dup2() instead of assigning file descriptors?

    dup2(cur_in, STDIN_FILENO);

->  dup2() duplicates an existing file descriptor onto a specific descriptor like stdin or stdout. 
    After duplication, any reads or writes through the standard streams automatically access the redirected file without 
    modifying the program itself.

Q9. Why close the original descriptor after dup2()?

->  Once dup2() succeeds, both descriptors refer to the same open file description. 
    The original descriptor is no longer needed, so closing it prevents descriptor leaks.

Q10. Why support multiple input/output redirections?

->  My implementation keeps only the last valid redirection, matching standard shell behavior where the last redirection takes precedence.

Q11. Why use O_TRUNC for > and O_APPEND for >> ?

->  > should overwrite the existing file, so I open it with O_TRUNC. >> should preserve existing contents and append new output, 
    so I use O_APPEND.



Section 4: Argument Parsing



Q12. Why implement your own argument splitter?

->  strtok() cannot correctly handle quoted strings. My parser recognizes both single and double quotes, 
    allowing arguments like "Hello World" to remain a single argument.

Q13. Why remove quotes during parsing?

->  Quotes are used only to group characters during parsing. Programs executed by execvp() should receive the actual argument values,
    not the quote characters themselves.



Section 5: fork()


Q14. Why do you call fork()?

->  The shell itself must continue running after executing a command. 
    fork() creates a child process where the command executes, while the parent shell remains alive to accept future commands.

Q15. Why doesn't the parent call execvp()?

->  execvp() replaces the current process image. If the parent shell called it directly, 
    the shell itself would disappear and become the executed program.

Q16. Why does the child perform all redirections?

->  Redirections should affect only the command being executed. 
    Performing them in the child ensures the shell's own stdin and stdout remain unchanged.



Section 6: execvp()



Q17. Why use execvp() instead of execv()?

->  execvp() automatically searches the directories listed in the PATH environment variable. 
    Users can type ls instead of specifying /bin/ls.

Q18. What happens after execvp() succeeds?

->  execvp() never returns on success. The child process image is completely replaced by the new program. 
    Any code following execvp() executes only if execution fails.

Q19. Why call _exit() instead of exit()?

->  After fork(), the child inherits buffered stdio state from the parent. 
    Calling exit() would flush those inherited buffers again, potentially producing duplicate output. 
    _exit() terminates the child immediately without invoking stdio cleanup or atexit() handlers.



Section 7: Process Groups

Q20. Why do all processes in a pipeline belong to one process group?

->  A pipeline is treated as one job by the shell. By placing every process in the same process group, 
    signals like Ctrl+C and Ctrl+Z are delivered to the entire pipeline instead of only one process.

Q21. Why is the first process chosen as the process group leader?

->  The first child naturally provides a process group ID that subsequent pipeline processes can join using setpgid().
    This is the standard approach used by Unix shells.

Q22. Why call setpgid() in both the child and the parent?

->  There is a race condition immediately after fork(): either the parent or the child may run first. 
    Calling setpgid() in both ensures the process is placed into the correct process group regardless of scheduling order.


Section 8: Foreground Jobs



Q23. Why do you call tcsetpgrp() before waiting?

->  The terminal must belong to the foreground job so that it can receive keyboard input and terminal-generated signals like Ctrl+C.
    After giving the terminal to the job, the shell waits for it to complete.

Q24. Why restore terminal ownership afterward?

    tcsetpgrp(STDIN_FILENO, getpgrp());

->  Once the foreground job finishes or stops, 
    the shell must reclaim terminal ownership so it can display the next prompt and continue accepting user input.

Q25. Why call signals_set_fg_pgid()?

->  My signal handlers need to know which process group currently owns the foreground job. 
    By storing the foreground PGID, the shell can correctly forward signals like Ctrl+C and Ctrl+Z to the active job.



Section 9: Background Jobs


Q26. Why don't background jobs wait?

->  Waiting would block the shell until the job finished, defeating the purpose of background execution. 
    Instead, the shell immediately returns to the prompt and periodically checks job status using waitpid(..., WNOHANG)
    in the job management module.

Q27. Why redirect stdin to /dev/null for background jobs?

->  Background jobs should not compete with the shell for terminal input. 
    Redirecting stdin to /dev/null prevents them from accidentally blocking while reading from the terminal and avoids SIGTTIN.

Q28. Explain how a pipeline like cat file | grep abc | wc executes.

->  The command line is first split into three commands. A pipe is created between each adjacent pair. 
    The stdout of one process is connected to the write end of the pipe,
    and the stdin of the next process is connected to the read end using dup2(). 
    All processes execute concurrently and belong to the same process group.

Q29. Why close unused pipe ends?

->  Leaving unused pipe descriptors open prevents EOF from reaching downstream processes and leaks file descriptors. 
    Closing them ensures correct pipeline behavior and proper resource management.

Q30. Why wait using

    waitpid(-pg, ...) instead of waitpid(pid, ...) 

->  Passing a negative PID tells the kernel to wait for any child belonging to the specified process group. 
    Since a pipeline contains multiple child processes, this allows the shell to monitor the entire job rather than just one process.


Section 11: Signals


Q31. Why use WUNTRACED?

->  WUNTRACED allows waitpid() to report when a child is stopped by signals like SIGTSTP,
    not just when it exits. This is essential for implementing job control.

Q32. Why call signals_handle_pending() after waiting?

->  After a foreground job exits or stops, there may be deferred signal-related work such as updating job state. 
    Calling signals_handle_pending() before reclaiming the terminal ensures those events are processed in the correct order.