

Overall Design


Q1. What is the responsibility of input.c?

->  input.c is responsible for interactive user input. It switches the terminal into raw mode, reads characters one at a time, 
    handles editing features such as backspace and history navigation, processes special keys like Ctrl+D and arrow keys, 
    and finally returns the completed command line to the shell.

Q2. Why didn't you simply use getline()?

->  getline() works only in canonical mode, where the terminal buffers input until Enter is pressed. 
    Since my shell supports interactive editing features like backspace handling and history navigation using arrow keys, 
    I needed to read individual keystrokes in raw mode.


Raw Mode


Q3. What is raw mode?

->  Raw mode is a terminal configuration where input is delivered to the program one character at a time instead of being line-buffered. 
    The terminal also stops performing features such as automatic echoing and line editing, allowing the shell to implement those behaviors itself.

Q4. Why enable raw mode?

->  Features like command history navigation and custom backspace handling require immediate access to each key press. 
    Raw mode allows the shell to process every character as soon as the user types it.

Q5. Why save the original terminal settings?

    static struct termios orig_termios;

->  Before modifying the terminal configuration, I save its original state so that I can restore it when input is complete or the shell exits. 
    This prevents the terminal from remaining in raw mode after the shell terminates.

Q6. What would happen if you didn't restore the terminal?

->  The terminal would remain in raw mode even after the shell exited. Characters would no longer echo, 
    line editing would stop working, and the terminal would appear broken until manually reset.

Q7. Why keep the raw_mode flag?

->  It prevents enabling or disabling raw mode multiple times unnecessarily. 
    This keeps terminal state transitions consistent and avoids redundant system calls.



termios



Q8. Why use termios?

->  termios is the POSIX interface for configuring terminal behavior. 
    It allows the shell to control features such as canonical mode, character echoing, and input timing.

Q9. What does ICANON do?

    raw.c_lflag &= ~ICANON;

->  ICANON enables canonical, or line-buffered, input. Clearing this flag disables line buffering, 
    causing characters to be delivered immediately instead of waiting for Enter.

Q10. What does ECHO do?

    raw.c_lflag &= ~ECHO;

->  ECHO causes the terminal to automatically display typed characters. 
    Disabling it allows the shell to control exactly what appears on the screen while implementing its own editing behavior.

Q11. Why disable both ICANON and ECHO?

->  Disabling canonical mode allows character-by-character input, while disabling echo prevents the terminal from printing characters automatically. 
    Together, they allow the shell to implement custom line editing.

Q12. What do VMIN and VTIME control?

->  VMIN specifies the minimum number of characters required before read() returns, while VTIME specifies the timeout. 
    Setting VMIN = 1 and VTIME = 0 causes read() to block until exactly one character is available.



Reading Input



Q13. Why use read() instead of scanf()?

->  read() operates directly on file descriptors and returns raw bytes exactly as they arrive from the terminal. 
    Functions like scanf() perform higher-level parsing and are unsuitable for character-by-character interactive input.

Q14. Why read one character at a time?

    read(STDIN_FILENO, &c, 1);

->  Reading a single character allows the shell to respond immediately to special keys such as backspace, 
    arrow keys, Ctrl+D, and Enter without waiting for an entire line.

Q15. Why return NULL on EOF?

->  Pressing Ctrl+D on an empty line generates EOF. Returning NULL signals the caller that the user wants to terminate the shell.



Enter Key



Q16. Why detect both '\r' and '\n'?

->  Different systems and terminals may send carriage return (\r) or newline (\n) when Enter is pressed. Handling both improves portability.



Backspace



Q17. How do you implement backspace?

->  When the user presses Backspace, the shell decreases the current cursor position and writes the sequence 
    "\b \b" to move the cursor back, erase the displayed character, and position the cursor correctly.

Q18. Why output "\b \b"?

->  \b moves the cursor one position left, the space overwrites the character currently displayed,
    and the final \b moves the cursor back again. Together they visually erase the last character.


Ctrl+D


Q19. Why does Ctrl+D exit only when the line is empty?

->  This matches standard shell behavior. Ctrl+D represents end-of-file only when no input has been entered. 
    If characters are already present, it is treated as a normal editing action rather than an exit request.



Arrow Keys

Q20. Why do arrow keys begin with ESC?

->  Arrow keys are transmitted as ANSI escape sequences beginning with the Escape character (27). 
    The shell reads the remaining bytes to determine which arrow key was pressed.

Q21. Why read two additional bytes?

->  The Up and Down arrow keys generate three-byte sequences such as ESC [ A and ESC [ B.
    After detecting ESC, the shell reads the remaining bytes to identify the specific key.

Q22. How does history navigation work?

->  The shell maintains an index into the command history. 
    Pressing the Up arrow decrements the index to retrieve older commands, while pressing the Down arrow increments it to move toward newer commands.

Q23. Why erase the current line before displaying a history entry?

->  Without clearing the current input, the previous command would overlap with the existing text. 
    Clearing the line first ensures only the selected history entry is displayed.

Q24. Why copy the history entry into buf?

->  The user may continue editing the recalled command. Copying it into the editable input buffer allows modifications before execution.



Buffer Management



Q25. Why use a static buffer?

->  The buffer remains valid after the function returns without requiring dynamic memory allocation. 
    Since the shell processes one command at a time, a single reusable buffer is sufficient.

Q26. Why check the buffer size before inserting characters?

->  The check prevents writing beyond the end of the buffer, protecting against buffer overflows and undefined behavior.

Q27. Why null-terminate the buffer?

->  The shell treats the input as a C string. Explicitly appending the null terminator ensures string operations work correctly.



Design Questions



Q28. Why restore cooked mode before returning?

->  Input handling is complete once the command has been read. 
    Restoring the original terminal settings ensures the rest of the shell and any child processes execute with normal terminal behavior.

Q29. Why doesn't this module know anything about parsing or execution?

->  input.c has a single responsibility: collecting user input. Parsing and execution are handled by separate modules, 
    keeping the design modular and easier to maintain.

Q30. Why implement history navigation here instead of history.c?

->  Detecting arrow keys is part of interactive input handling, so it naturally belongs in input.c. 
    The history module is responsible for storing and managing history entries, while input.c handles the user interface for navigating them.




Imported Questions


Q31. Why do you need raw mode instead of canonical mode?

->  Canonical mode buffers input until the user presses Enter, so the program cannot react to individual key presses. 
    My shell supports features such as history navigation with arrow keys, custom backspace handling, 
    and immediate processing of Ctrl+D. To implement these interactive features, I switch the terminal into raw mode using termios, 
    disable canonical mode and echo, process each keystroke myself, and then restore the original terminal settings when input is complete.



Limitations 


->  It does not support in-line cursor movement (Left/Right arrows), editing in the middle of the line, or terminal resizing.