


INITIALISATION

Q1. Why do you call setpgid(shell_pgid, shell_pgid)?

->  When my shell starts, it is initially a child process of another shell, such as bash.
    At that point it belongs to the parent's process group. I call setpgid(shell_pgid, shell_pgid)
    to create a new process group where my shell becomes the leader. This isolates my shell from the parent shell's 
    process group and allows it to manage its own foreground and background jobs independently.


Q2. Why can't you directly call tcsetpgrp()?

->  Before calling tcsetpgrp(), my shell is still considered a background process group because 
    the terminal is owned by the parent shell's process group. If I immediately try to manipulate the terminal,
    the kernel may send SIGTTOU and suspend my shell. Therefore, I ignore SIGTTOU before calling tcsetpgrp() 
    so the shell can safely become the foreground process group.

Q3. Why do you ignore SIGTTOU? 

SIGTTOU stands for Signal TTOU (Signal to Background Output). 

->  SIGTTOU is sent when a background process group attempts terminal-related operations, 
    such as changing the foreground process group using tcsetpgrp().
    During shell initialization my shell is temporarily a background process group,
    so ignoring SIGTTOU prevents it from being suspended before it can take ownership of the terminal.

Q4. Why do you ignore SIGTTIN?

SIGTTIN stands for "Signal Terminal Input"

->  SIGTTIN is sent when a background process group tries to read from the controlling terminal.
    During initialization there is a short period where my shell is still considered a background process group.
    Ignoring SIGTTIN ensures that if any terminal read happens during this phase, the shell won't suspend itself.

Q5. What happens if you remove these two lines?

    signal(SIGTTOU, SIG_IGN);   
    signal(SIGTTIN, SIG_IGN);

->  The shell may suspend itself during initialization. After creating its own process group with setpgid(),
    it is still not the terminal's foreground owner. If it performs terminal operations like tcsetpgrp(),
    the kernel may send SIGTTOU. Since the default action is to stop the process, the shell can freeze before the REPL loop starts.

Q6. Why is tcsetpgrp() necessary?

->  Creating a process group using setpgid() only organizes processes logically. 
    It does not give the shell control of the terminal. tcsetpgrp() changes the terminal's foreground process group to my shell,
    allowing it to receive keyboard input and control interactive programs.

Q7. What is the difference between setpgid() and tcsetpgrp()?

->  setpgid() creates or changes a process group, while tcsetpgrp() changes which process group currently owns the terminal.
    One manages process organization, and the other manages terminal ownership.

Q8. Why is terminal ownership important?

->  Only the foreground process group is allowed to interact freely with the terminal. 
    Interactive programs like vim, nano, or cat expect to receive keyboard input.
    If they are not in the foreground process group, the kernel prevents terminal interaction by sending signals like SIGTTIN or SIGTTOU.

Q9. What is a process group?

->  A process group is a collection of related processes identified by a process group ID (PGID). 
    The shell creates a separate process group for each job so it can manage all processes in that job together.
    Signals like SIGINT, SIGTSTP, or SIGKILL can then be sent to the entire process group.

Q10.Why do you use negative PIDs in kill()?

    kill(-g, SIGKILL);

->  Passing a negative PID to kill() tells the kernel to send the signal to every process in that process group.
    Since a job may contain multiple processes, especially pipelines,
    this allows me to terminate the entire job instead of only one process.

Q11. Why do you create separate process groups for jobs?

->  A job may consist of multiple processes, such as commands connected by pipes. 
    By placing all of them into the same process group, I can move the entire job between foreground and background, 
    and send signals like SIGINT, SIGTSTP, or SIGKILL to all processes together.

Q12. Why doesn't the shell itself terminate when the user presses Ctrl+C?

->  Ctrl+C generates SIGINT for the foreground process group. When another program is running in the foreground, 
    the shell temporarily gives terminal ownership to that program's process group,
    so the signal is delivered to the program instead of the shell. After the program exits or stops, the shell regains terminal ownership.

Q13. Why do shells use process groups instead of individual PIDs?

->  Many commands are composed of multiple processes, such as pipelines. Managing each PID individually would be complicated. 
    Process groups let the shell treat all related processes as a single job for signal delivery and terminal control.

Q14. Why is job control based on process groups?

->  Operations like foregrounding, backgrounding, stopping, resuming, and signal handling apply to entire jobs 
    rather than individual processes. Process groups provide the kernel mechanism that makes job control efficient and reliable.

Q15. Walk me through your shell initialization.

->  First, I initialize the shell state, history, prompt, jobs, and signal handlers. 
    Then I ignore SIGTTIN and SIGTTOU to avoid being suspended while taking terminal control.
    Next, I create a new process group using setpgid() so the shell becomes its own process group leader. 
    After that, I call tcsetpgrp() to make the shell's process group the foreground owner of the terminal. 
    Once initialization is complete, I enter the main REPL loop, where I repeatedly read input, parse commands, 
    execute them, and monitor background jobs.


REPL LOOP 

Q1. What is a REPL loop?

->  REPL stands for Read-Evaluate-Print Loop. It is the main execution loop of an interactive shell. In my shell, 
    it repeatedly waits for user input, parses the command, executes it, and then waits for the next command until EOF is received.

Q2. Walk me through your shell_loop().

->  The loop starts by checking for completed background jobs. Then it displays the prompt and flushes stdout to ensure
    the prompt appears immediately. Next, it reads a line of input from the user. If EOF is received, the shell performs 
    cleanup and exits. Otherwise, it stores the command, updates command history, normalizes operators, performs syntax validation, 
    executes the command sequence, and finally checks background jobs again before waiting for the next command.

Q3. Why do you call jobs_check() before showing the prompt?

    jobs_check(&global_shell_state);
    show_prompt(&global_shell_state);

->  Background jobs may finish while the shell is idle waiting for input. 
    Calling jobs_check() before printing the prompt ensures completed jobs are reported immediately, 
    so the prompt always reflects the latest job state.

Q4. Why do you call jobs_check() again after reading input?

    jobs_check(&global_shell_state);

->  A background job may terminate while the user is typing a command. 
    Calling jobs_check() again ensures those state changes are detected before executing the next command,
    keeping the job table synchronized.

Q5. Why do you call jobs_check() after executing commands?

    run_sequence(norm);
    jobs_check(&global_shell_state);

->  Some commands may immediately start or finish background jobs. 
    Checking again after execution updates the shell's job table before the next prompt is displayed.

Q6. Why do you flush stdout after printing the prompt?

    show_prompt(...);
    fflush(stdout);

->  Standard output is buffered. Without fflush(), the prompt might remain in the buffer and not appear immediately, 
    especially when stdout is not line-buffered. Flushing guarantees the user sees the prompt before input is read

Q7. Why don't you directly use the returned pointer from input_read_line()?

    char *raw = input_read_line(...);
    strncpy(line, raw, 2047);

->  I copy the returned string into my own buffer so the shell has ownership of the command. 
    This prevents later modifications or internal buffer reuse inside the input module from affecting command processing.

Q8. Why do you allocate line only once?

    if (!line) line = malloc(2048);

->  The shell executes continuously. Allocating memory once and reusing it avoids repeated 
    heap allocations and deallocations for every command, reducing overhead.

Q9. Why use strncpy() instead of directly assigning the pointer?

->  Pointer assignment would only copy the address, meaning both variables refer to the same memory.
    By copying the contents into my own buffer, I ensure the shell owns an independent copy of the command.

Q10. Why do you explicitly null terminate?

    line[2047] = '\0';

->  strncpy() does not guarantee null termination if the source string reaches the specified limit.
    Explicitly setting the last character prevents buffer overreads and undefined behavior.

Q11. Why do you handle EOF separately?

    if (!raw) {
        printf("logout\n");
        kill_all(...);
        break;
    }

->  NULL indicates EOF, typically generated by Ctrl+D. Instead of treating it as an error, 
    the shell performs cleanup by terminating managed jobs, restoring terminal state, and exiting gracefully.

Q12. Why don't you exit immediately on EOF?

->  My shell may still have active background jobs. Before exiting,
    I terminate those jobs and restore terminal settings to avoid leaving orphaned processes running.

Q13. Why skip empty commands?

    if (line[0] == '\0') continue;

->  Empty input is not an error. The shell simply ignores it and displays the next prompt without 
    performing unnecessary parsing or execution.

Q14. Why add commands to history before parsing?

    history_add_if_needed(...);

->  History records what the user typed, not necessarily what executes successfully.
    Even if parsing later fails, the original command remains available in history, matching the behavior of common Unix shells.

Q15.Why normalize && before parsing?

    norm_and_and(line, norm, sizeof(norm));

->  My shell internally represents logical separators in a simplified form before parsing. 
    Normalizing the input reduces parser complexity because the parser only needs to handle one representation 
    instead of multiple equivalent forms.

Q16. Why validate syntax before execution?

    if (!parse_shell_cmd(norm)) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Syntax error\n");
        continue;
    }

->  Parsing verifies the command structure before execution. Detecting syntax errors early prevents partially
    executing malformed commands and keeps execution logic simpler.

Q17. Why separate parsing and execution?

->  Parsing determines whether the command is syntactically valid, while execution performs the requested operations. 
    Separating these responsibilities improves modularity, simplifies debugging, and makes the shell easier to extend.

Q18. Why pass shell_state everywhere?

->  shell_state centralizes the shell's runtime information, including jobs, history, prompt state, and previous working directory.
    Passing it explicitly avoids excessive global variables and keeps module interfaces consistent.

Q19. Why is shell_loop() an infinite loop?

    for (;;)

->  An interactive shell is designed to run continuously until the user explicitly exits or EOF is received. 
    Using an infinite loop naturally models this behavior, with termination handled by break when required.

Q20. Why use continue instead of nested if statements?

->  Early continue statements handle exceptional cases like empty input or syntax errors immediately. 
    This keeps the main execution path linear and improves readability.

Q21. What is the execution pipeline of your shell?

->  The execution flow is:
    Check background jobs.
    Display the prompt.
    Read user input.
    Handle EOF if present.
    Copy the command into the shell's buffer.
    Check background jobs again.
    Ignore empty commands.
    Store the command in history.
    Normalize the input.
    Validate syntax.
    Execute the command sequence.
    Update background job status.
    Repeat.

